

## SMTP:

How to install and configure Postfix

Packages Required : Postfix

Port: 25
Configuration File: /etc/postfix/main.cf
Service : postfix


The most commonly used implementations of SMTP in most Linux distros are Sendmail and Postfix. Postfix is an open source mail-transfer agent that was originally developed as an alternative to Sendmail and is usually set up as the default mail server.

Installing Postfix
Skip to the bottom of list
Great Linux resources
Advanced Linux commands cheat sheet
Download RHEL 9 at no charge through the Red Hat Developer program
A guide to installing applications on Linux
Linux system administration skills assessment
How well do you know Linux? Take a quiz and get a badge
Before beginning to install, first things first. A good habit to have is to check and see if the software is installed on the server already. It’s always helpful to check if something is there before getting to work.

To check on RPM-based distros, use this command:

$ rpm -qa | grep postfix
If the previous command shows that the RPM is not installed, you can install the Postfix RPM with the following (on yum-based distros):

$ yum install -y postfix
After Postfix is installed, you can start the service and enable it to make sure it starts after reboot:

$ systemctl start postfix
$ systemctl enable postfix
Configuring Postfix
After Postfix is installed, you can start configuring the service to your liking. All of the options you need for the service are located in /etc/postfix. The main configuration file for the Postfix service is located at /etc/postfix/main.cf. Within the configuration file, there are many options that you can add, some of them more common than others. Let's go over a few you may see the most when setting up the service, and when needing to troubleshooting it:

myhostname declares the mail server’s hostname. Hostnames normally have prefixes in them, like this:
myhostname = mail.sinisterriot.com
mydomain declares the domain that is actually handling mail, like this:
mydomain = sinisterriot.com
mail_spool_directory declares the directory where mailbox files are placed, like so:
mail_spool_directory = /var/mail
mynetworks declares a list of trusted remote SMTP servers that can relay through the server, like this:
mynetworks = 127.0.0.0/8, 168.100.189.0/28
The list provided with mynetworks should only contain local network IP addresses, or network/netmask patterns that are separated by commas or whitespace. It’s important to only use local network addresses to avoid unauthorized users using your mail server for malicious activity, resulting in your server and addresses being blacklisted.

Testing Postfix
Before putting something into production, testing it in a dev environment is always a good idea. This process has the same concept: Once you get the mail server configured, test it to make sure that it works.

First, I recommend testing whether you can send an email to a local recipient. If successful, you can proceed to a remote recipient. I prefer to use the telnet command to test my mail server:

$ telnet mail.sinisterriot.com 25
Add the HELO command to tell the server which domain you are coming from:

HELO sinisterriot.com
Next is the sender. This ID can be added with the MAIL FROM command:

MAIL FROM: somewhere@sinisteriot.com
This entry is followed by the recipient, and you can add more than one by using the RCPT TO command multiple times:

RCPT TO: someone@sinisterriot.com
Finally, we can add the content of the message. To reach the content mode, we add the prefix DATA on a line by itself, followed by the Subject line, and the body message. Listed below is an example:

DATA

Subject: This is a test message  

Hello,

This is a test message

.
In order to finish the message body and close it, you need to add a single period (.) or dot on a line by itself. Once this process is complete, the server will attempt to send the email with the information you provided. The code response will notify you if the email was successful or not. Once done, use the quit command to close the mailing window.

In any regard, check the mail logs for errors. They are located in /var/log/maillog by default, but this location can be changed to another place. As a system administrator, checking error logs is a good habit to have. This practice is great in troubleshooting and gives us insight into identifying and fixing an issue faster. Deciphering mail logs is an important part of admin work as well, as each part of the log lets us know what is important. In my past years, knowing these parts has helped me write scripts for specific requests while only needing to redact or leave out parts of the mail logs.
